README.rst, before:

backup-vm
=========

Back up your libvirt-based VMs using Borg_!

.. _Borg: https://github.com/borgbackup/borg

Features
--------

* Backup running VMs

  * Automatically creates a `COW snapshot`_ of virtual disks to avoid corruption and pivots_ them back afterwards
  * From the perspective of the VM, restoring from a live backup is like a sudden power-off

    * Chances of file corruption are still low with a `guest agent`_ installed

* Can back up multiple VM disks

  * Supports disk images backed by a file or a block device

* Can back up to multiple Borg repositories at once

  * Only one snapshot operation needed for multiple backups
  * Auto-answers subsequent prompts from other borg processes
  * Shows total backup progress % (even with multiple backups)

* Pass extra arguments straight to Borg on the command line

  * Different settings (e.g. compression) can be passed to each instance

.. _COW snapshot: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Snapshots
.. _pivots: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Live-disk-backup-with-active-blockcommit
.. _guest agent: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Qemu_guest_agent

Examples
--------

Backup
^^^^^^

Back up a virtual machine to a single Borg repo::

    backup-vm myVM myrepo::myBackup

Back up a virtual machine ``webserver`` to an onsite and an offsite Borg repository with varying compression settings::

    backup-vm webserver onsite::webserver-{now:%Y-%m-%d} --borg-args --compression lz4 offsite::webserver-{now:%Y-%m-%d} --borg-args --compression zlib,9

Back up only the system drive of a Windows VM::

    backup-vm win10 sda myrepo::win10-{now:%Y-%m-%d}

Restore
^^^^^^^

A script for automatic restoration is `in development`_; however, the backups are saved with a simple directory structure that makes manual restoration easy. Each backup has the image of each disk clearly named in the root directory (e.g. ``sda.raw``, ``hdb.qcow2``). The legacy `bash script`_ for restoring follows a similar process to what the Python version will, with the notable exception that it does not handle multiple disks.

.. _in development: https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm/issues/1
.. _bash script: https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm/blob/bash-script/restore-vm.sh

Usage
-----

.. BEGIN AUTO-GENERATED USAGE
::

    usage: backup-vm [-hpv] domain [disk [disk ...]] archive
        [--borg-args ...] [archive [--borg-args ...] ...]

    Back up a libvirt-based VM using borg.

    positional arguments:
      domain           libvirt domain to back up
      disk             a domain block device to back up (default: all disks)
      archive          a borg archive path (same format as borg create)

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help       show this help message and exit
      -v, --version    show version of the backup-vm package
      -p, --progress   force progress display even if stdout isn't a tty
      --borg-args ...  extra arguments passed straight to borg

::

    usage: borg-multi [-hpv] [--path PATH] [--borg-cmd SUBCOMMAND]
        archive [--borg-args ...] [archive [--borg-args ...] ...]

    Batch multiple borg commands into one.

    positional arguments:
      archive          a borg archive path (same format as borg create)

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help       show this help message and exit
      -v, --version    show version of the backup-vm package
      -l, --path       path for borg to archive (default: .)
      -p, --progress   force progress display even if stdout isn't a tty
      -c, --borg-cmd   alternate borg subcommand to run (default: create)
      --borg-args ...  extra arguments passed straight to borg

.. END AUTO-GENERATED USAGE

Building
--------

Example of how the binary is built, based on Debian Bullseye.

::

    git clone https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm.git
    cd backup-vm
    sudo apt-get install python3-pip python3-setuptools python3-libvirt
    python3 setup.py build
    sudo python3 setup.py install

::

The binary ``backup-vm`` will now exist in ``/usr/local/bin/``.

Installation
------------

Python ≥3.5 is required, as well as the Python libvirt bindings. If possible, install them from the system package manager (``apt install python3-libvirt``); otherwise, use pip (``pip install libvirt-python``). To install the script, copy it into ``/usr/local/bin`` and optionally remove the ``.py`` extension.

For offline backups, ``qemu-img`` is required, although it is normally installed along with libvirt.

Commit message:

Options to exclude disk images

README.rst, after:

backup-vm
=========

Back up your libvirt-based VMs using Borg_!

.. _Borg: https://github.com/borgbackup/borg

Features
--------

* Backup running VMs

  * Automatically creates a `COW snapshot`_ of virtual disks to avoid corruption and pivots_ them back afterwards
  * From the perspective of the VM, restoring from a live backup is like a sudden power-off

    * Chances of file corruption are still low with a `guest agent`_ installed

* Can back up multiple VM disks

  * Supports disk images backed by a file or a block device

* Can back up to multiple Borg repositories at once

  * Only one snapshot operation needed for multiple backups
  * Auto-answers subsequent prompts from other borg processes
  * Shows total backup progress % (even with multiple backups)

* Pass extra arguments straight to Borg on the command line

  * Different settings (e.g. compression) can be passed to each instance

.. _COW snapshot: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Snapshots
.. _pivots: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Live-disk-backup-with-active-blockcommit
.. _guest agent: https://wiki.libvirt.org/page/Qemu_guest_agent

Examples
--------

Backup
^^^^^^

Back up a virtual machine to a single Borg repo::

    backup-vm myVM myrepo::myBackup

Back up a virtual machine ``webserver`` to an onsite and an offsite Borg repository with varying compression settings::

    backup-vm webserver onsite::webserver-{now:%Y-%m-%d} --borg-args --compression lz4 offsite::webserver-{now:%Y-%m-%d} --borg-args --compression zlib,9

Back up only the system drive of a Windows VM::

    backup-vm win10 sda myrepo::win10-{now:%Y-%m-%d}

Restore
^^^^^^^

A script for automatic restoration is `in development`_; however, the backups are saved with a simple directory structure that makes manual restoration easy. Each backup has the image of each disk clearly named in the root directory (e.g. ``sda.raw``, ``hdb.qcow2``). The legacy `bash script`_ for restoring follows a similar process to what the Python version will, with the notable exception that it does not handle multiple disks.

.. _in development: https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm/issues/1
.. _bash script: https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm/blob/bash-script/restore-vm.sh

Usage
-----

.. BEGIN AUTO-GENERATED USAGE
::

    usage: backup-vm [-hpv] domain [disk [disk ...]] archive
        [--borg-args ...] [archive [--borg-args ...] ...]

    Back up a libvirt-based VM using borg.

    positional arguments:
      domain                libvirt domain to back up
      disk                  a domain block device to back up (default: all disks)
      archive               a borg archive path (same format as borg create)

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -v, --version         show version of the backup-vm package
      --exclude-source-dev  exclude source device from being backed up, can be repeated
      --exclude-target-dev  exclude target device from being backed up, can be repeated
      -p, --progress        force progress display even if stdout isn't a tty
      --borg-args ...       extra arguments passed straight to borg

::

    usage: borg-multi [-hpv] [--path PATH] [--borg-cmd SUBCOMMAND]
        archive [--borg-args ...] [archive [--borg-args ...] ...]

    Batch multiple borg commands into one.

    positional arguments:
      archive               a borg archive path (same format as borg create)

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -v, --version         show version of the backup-vm package
      -l, --path            path for borg to archive (default: .)
      -p, --progress        force progress display even if stdout isn't a tty
      -c, --borg-cmd        alternate borg subcommand to run (default: create)
      --borg-args ...       extra arguments passed straight to borg

.. END AUTO-GENERATED USAGE

Building
--------

Example of how the binary is built, based on Debian Bullseye.

::

    git clone https://github.com/milkey-mouse/backup-vm.git
    cd backup-vm
    sudo apt-get install python3-pip python3-setuptools python3-libvirt
    python3 setup.py build
    sudo python3 setup.py install

::

The binary ``backup-vm`` will now exist in ``/usr/local/bin/``.

Installation
------------

Python ≥3.5 is required, as well as the Python libvirt bindings. If possible, install them from the system package manager (``apt install python3-libvirt``); otherwise, use pip (``pip install libvirt-python``). To install the script, copy it into ``/usr/local/bin`` and optionally remove the ``.py`` extension.

For offline backups, ``qemu-img`` is required, although it is normally installed along with libvirt.
